two hours let's make sure it's running there it is we're talking to ken carpenter to the right and richard newman to the left so we'll just talk yeah about you know whether you know harvard and cornell are going to you know get more alike i i think that that is there's a good chance that that they will and that indeed all libraries are going to
to be more alike, simply because every library has to put much more emphasis on the digital than on the printed.
If you don't put more emphasis on the digital, you're not going to be serving the needs of your students and faculty.
So that means that you're going to, you know, to increasingly fill the institution with people who especially value the digital, whose careers are in the digital,
and and the older you know the books are are almost certainly you know not going to be as valued in that in that process except perhaps for the rare books now let me just and i'm not asking you to directly respond to this but maybe in general but i was just transcribed the cornell tapes over the weekend and i'm writing that part i was sarah thomas who's been to university library a nice woman she's when i interviewed she's just recently arrived
And we were talking about, you know, they are under mandate, by the way, to bring Cornell's collections from 6.8 million on campus to 5 million by the year 2000 and never let it go above that.
And that's what Los Angeles said.
But that's
But they're going to move some stuff out to the orchard, they say, which is a Harvard model type of a depository.
It's the number on campus.
They aren't being told to, you know, to get rid of.
And that's important.
But I was talking to Sarah, and I said, well, you know, Cornell is kind of leading the world in digitization as a means of preservation.
And they're going very slowly.
But she said that when she first got there, it was proposed to her
by the people they have a school there of food preparation and hospitality a little one of these specialty schools they have a 15 000 volume library and it's proposed to her by that school to digitize the books that are important and get rid of the rest of them and maybe build a maybe build a computer research that she said i was charmed by the idea i was attracted she didn't accept it she was going to study it but she thought this might be a very interesting test to model
as a model of a very discreet kind of a library.
Hotel management.
And I said, but if it works, they're going to, some people might say, and then she finished the sentence, yes, today hotel management, tomorrow shake.
Which is true.
And that's not the kind of thing you would even consider at Harvard.
I mean, she has 19 libraries.
You've got 90 to 100 libraries.
Well, I mean, if one of your small libraries says, gee, let's try this out, I don't think that would happen at Harvard, but what do you think the attitude of something like that would be here?
Is that, that's kind of not even in your, in your... It's not even within my, my, my... It's not even in the scope of... Yeah.
It's not my question.
Yeah.
Anyway, I'm sorry to... Yeah, no, it's not within my, my, my, the, the...
in the realm of my thinking, but, you know, but you should ask the question to, you know, Nancy Klein or Sid Verber, you know?
Exactly.
And, uh... I think I will, actually.
I've got to tell you that.
It's the right question.
Yeah.
And, uh,
I need to tell you about New York Public.
And I really want to go back to work.
Okay, but New York Public is very important in this book, so I'm thrilled I can have the ring for you.
And can you just tell me briefly for the background when you were there and what you did?
I went to New York Public in around 1980, just as a favor to the administration and to fill in temporarily in the rare book room while they were reorganizing.
And then I stayed ten years in a variety of
of capacities, partly in rare books, partly in special collections.
Then one of the most important things that Gregorian did after when he came was to establish or re-establish in an entirely new way the exhibition program.
That made him, in a way.
And so the problem or the issue was that, well, I'm on a number of threads now, but I'll try and put them together.
Because I want to go back to his coming, because that changed the New York Public Library forever.
I'm interrupting, but you didn't tell me what your capacity was.
Did you have a title?
No, it varied.
And you went there from where, with the expertise?
From publishing.
I had been a publisher, an editor, and I had been an academic.
In New York?
Publishing in New York and Boston, an academic in Boston.
Let me say a bit about Gregorian, because, as I say, that's so crucial, and that changed my job also.
New York Public was a very traditional and very conventional library until his arrival, run by librarians, run by a ward that was largely people who were book-oriented as opposed to corporate types.
And New York Public had a lot of money.
money that it was able to live on from the consolidation of the libraries 100 years ago, but which beginning, you know, 20, 30 years ago, began not to be able to buy what it had been able to buy in the past.
And there had never been a capital campaign.
I assume you know the history in terms of the Astor Library and the
the Lennox Library, and the Tilden Trust, which is where the money came from.
A remarkable story by itself of how those institutions came together with the city of New York to create a public entity out of public, a public entity out of private.
And continues actually in a very bizarre, totally bizarre way.
It's a self-perpetuating board of trustees.
But the library had begun to decline financially.
and therefore in influence.
And Gregorian was something of an unusual choice, I think, as a librarian.
How that, as director, and how that happened, I don't know.
That's a political story, which I don't know.
But he began immediately to try to transform the institution from
I don't want to say it was sleepy, but it was very traditional.
His first emphasis was on raising money, and his way to do that was to make the library news, which it never had been before, and a center of attention, which it had not been.
And that turned out to be very easy to do.
I don't want to detract from him.
Perhaps only he could have thought of doing it.
But once someone thought of doing it, as we said, as we used to say, who hates the library?
Nobody.
I mean, the New York City is full of friends of the library who'd never been asked to do anything.
So before his coming there had been a very significant needs assessment.
I'm just checking what I'm doing tonight.
You know, administrators do that sort of thing.
Where do you want to be in ten years?
But nobody had ever taken one of those seriously before.
Until under, under, just before the drawing came, it was clear that what the library needed was about a billion dollars.
Okay.
And so they went to the fundraising people who said, you know, it can't be done.
You know, everybody said, what I need is, what I want is, and they added it off, and it's a billion dollars.
The fundraiser said, it cannot be done.
But what you can do is, what you can aim for is a third of that.
A third of the program.
That's realistic.
So everything was cut back expectations.
Gregorian came to institute, to institute that, that program, and which he,
I'll try to make it short and simple.
He turned the institution into something other than what it had been.
It became very corporate.
That is, he called himself the CEO.
He expanded enormously an office of public relations.
It used to be one woman who occasionally called up somebody.
Now there's a vast office of professionals.
But most important was a vast and very expensive office of fundraising.
Is this bad by the way?
I'm curious.
It's good and bad.
It's interesting.
It's good because he raised the money.
He raised a third of a billion dollars.
It's bad because none of that, not a cent of that, went for books or Stan.
You can ask, what are the great acquisitions of the New York Public Library under Vartan Gregorian and his third of a billion dollars?
And the answer is none.
It went into the building.
Floodlights, everything was redone, old, everything was polished.
So everybody would walk by and say,
Gee, the New York Public Library is really different.
Well, it is and it isn't.
It was a Potemkin village in a way, and it raised consciousness about the library.
It made the library a fashionable place to be for New York society to be involved with.
So there were, it became socially acceptable, no, socially desirable,
to be on the board or associated, like the Met or the Opera or something, which it hadn't been before.
It had been sort of book people.
Then, you can't use this as a direct quote, but in fact they sold seats on the board.
And the board changed from book people to corporate.
I could ask them.
I mean, certainly I used it as a quote, but I could pursue it.
Well, I saw the
I saw the letters that went to new members of the board.
Vice President of the X Corporation, welcome to the board.
We look forward to your contribution of $100,000, $250,000, $500,000.
Gregorian, he was an academic, so he insisted on holding one of those seats.
for Tony Morrison.
But with the others, it turned it into a corporate, into corporate management, his style, and now a board, you know, behind him.
So the atmosphere was entirely different.
It was no longer bookish.
It was no longer bookmen, book people were no longer, you know, the power shifted
over to this new breed of professional managers.
A lot of people came from the zoo, which became a library in-joke.
That is a class of professional managers who won't move from one non-profit institution to the other and couldn't tell the difference between the library and the zoo.
And it didn't matter to them.
I'm so glad you didn't say monkeys in the zoo.
I got monkeys out in some room.
Well, I remember sitting at a meeting of maybe 25 people.
This was the new managerial class that had taken over.
It took a couple of years to happen.
What positions are we talking about?
Well, the director of—the vice president for fundraising, public relations.
That's really who—these were Gregorian's own staff.
These were people who, you know, sort of— How did it impact the actual—the ability to come in and find knowledge, shall we say?
Say again?
The ability for a scholar, a reader— It didn't change that, because the librarians remain the same.
That's an important point to make, then.
Oh, it's a crucial point to make, because in terms of public service, which is what— See, New York Public is different from all other libraries in that.
It has the size and quality of either a national library or a great university library that's public.
Anybody can go in there and do anything.
You don't have to have a library card.
You don't have to do anything.
It is astonishing.
I tried to get a library card.
There's no such thing.
That's right.
This is the people's university.
This is free, you know, to anybody.
And that, you know, there's a problem of uniting democratic access to elitist collections.
There's an inherent contradiction, and it doesn't always work, but it is one of the great ideas
And it is one of the great principles.
And for 100 years, for all practical purposes, it has worked.
So the guy coming in, and everybody's treated the same.
The crazy person who comes in to copy the dictionary in his notebooks or the serious researcher, they're all treated the same.
The library staff is very good.
Their morale began to go down because they saw that the library had been taken away from them.
You know, but I interviewed Martin last year.
Now, it's interesting.
His story might be different.
When he arrived, he said there were suggestions that they sell an Audubon folio, they start parsing off things to raise money.
No, nothing was ever sold.
But he said there were suggestions.
Well, that might very well be.
There were other alternatives here that he was faced with.
I don't fall into what he did in terms of... And he said that was totally not part of his agenda, so I mean... Oh, that's true.
Well, I don't dispute that at all.
But I'm just saying it changed from... I don't want to say it changed from the library, because if you're a reader and you go in off the street, it's just that nothing is different.
But inside, it's totally different.
The mentality is different.
You mean at the administrative level?
Oh, yes, absolutely.
And that's the town.
And they've continued this with Paul.
Paul's not a librarian.
Well, he's more of a scholar and academic than Gregorian was.
But you're seeing this now, aren't you?
That libraries are picking non-librarians.
Sure.
Dr. Billington of the Library of Congress.
I remember sitting in a, I started to say, a meeting of the people who are now running the library, and something came up about the library's Bible collection, which is one of the greatest in the West, the first Gutenberg to come to America.
We used to call Mr. Minnix, as if he was still with us.
All these people started laughing.
They said, why does the library collect Bibles?
The whole table of 25 people who are running the library.
They had no concept of print, of the history of printing, of book collecting.
The idea to collect Bibles was just so alien to them.
It's like saying, why do we have a collection of
ice cream cones.
I mean, it's totally out of their capacity to comprehend.
So what I'm suggesting is there's an incredibly significant shift in the orientation on the part of management.
You can't say administration anymore because these are managers who go from the zoo to the library and can't tell the difference.
How do you define the difference between the ministers?
Well, I don't know.
I'm just trying to say these are professionals who are not book people who think they can manage anything and, in fact, can't manage anything very well unknown.
So one of the things that Gregorian set out to do, to draw attention to the library as a precondition for fundraising, was to establish an extraordinarily successful
exhibition program, a glorious room that had been turned into tacky offices.
The plywood was torn down, and underneath was one of the most glorious rooms in New York, now called the Gottesman exhibition.
And he had that redone, the Gottesman family, whose money comes from paper.
paid for that and he hired an extraordinary the a couple of people were behind him behind who gregorian he was not there alone this is an aside but it's when it comes back the circle comes back the most important person behind him was andrew high school who was chairman of the board and andrew high school had the style the connections and the commitment
First of all, he was married to the New York Times at the time.
How do we spell high school?
H-E-I-S-K-E-L-L.
He had run Time, Life, and Fortune, and his wife was the New York Times.
This is what LexisNexis is perfect for, how you can do a search on this diary.
Well, he knew everybody.
He's the sort of person who, you could say,
Andrew, we want to borrow a book from the Lennon State Library, and we've written and written, and they don't respond.
Would you call up the Secretary of State and have him call the criminal?
And he would go right to the phone and say, what's the book you want?
I mean, that happened.
I was there when that happened, that illustration of this.
And so behind the scenes of Gregorian was this sophisticated, elegant, literate person, Andrew High School.
Gregorian also had a very effective vice president for development whose name eludes me.
He now runs the
He was very good.
And then he also hired a woman named Diantha Shule to do exhibitions, and she was brilliant.
And so an exhibition was no longer, you know, some books in a case that
that ten people came to see.
It became a glittering New York society opening, and that exhibition staff was quite brilliant.
I just did a piece on the Romanov thing for this probiglial.
I mean, it's a first-rate exhibition.
Well, look at the New York Public Library exhibitions from the mid-'80s, and they cost, unfortunately,
That's part of the Gregorian's fundraising, went into fundraising.
But it changed the exhibitions, turned the library into a public space, you know, in a public social space, in a way that it hadn't been before.
And so then the library was for rent.
Corporate people had— You have no idea how much this parallels what's going on out in San Francisco.
They actually built this library, and you go in and say, where are the books?
They built this thing to have social functions.
And they really went out and courted corporate sponsors.
They named these affinity rooms.
There's the Hormel, you know, whatever it is.
The gay lesbian collection is the Hormel collection.
So far as I know, it was Gregorian, the libraries, who started that.
And he got it from the MEP.
Our model was the MEP, because wherever you turn in the MEP, there's the cash register.
And so there was a gift shop.
This is about the mid-'80s, and my job was really sort of liaison between this new administration, which was hot, exciting, dramatic, money-raising, corporate, fashionable, and the librarians who knew the material, who were
public service oriented.
These couldn't have been two more different communities of people.
And so I went to work in exhibitions, working with the library staff to think of projects for exhibitions, helping select objects to put on display.
Were you kind of like an intermediary between the two camps?
Yes, it was exactly what it was.
Trying to explain to the librarians that Gregorian
that this was necessary.
And did you believe it was necessary?
Yes.
I became more disillusioned as I went along when I saw that it was more shallow than I had thought.
But I often quoted Gregorian, and I still will and could, in agreement, if you don't like having corporate parties here, you tell me another way to raise that much money in one night.
Now, the answer is there is no other way to raise that much money in one night.
And so, you know, if you're a librarian making $20,000 a year and on your way out at 6 o'clock you see the limousines come up and the strawberries dipped in chocolate flown in from Paris, you say, what's happened to my librarian?
So my job really was to talk to people
to both groups and say to the administrative staff, you know, this is not a corporate headquarters.
These librarians think differently, act differently.
They're like academics.
They have different values and so forth.
So it was a conflict that was never really resolved.
And Gregorian, who was enormously popular among New Yorkers,
was not popular at all among the staff.
So were you there when he left for Brown, or had you already left, that you were still there?
Yes.
And so you were there from 80 to 90, is that what you said?
Yes, I saw him come, I saw him go.
And then his successor was the Jesuit, I think, is that right?
Yes, Timothy Healy, a very odd choice.
But he got that job because he was president of Georgetown,
Somebody handed me a printed page.
It was a law passed by the Congress of the United States and said to me, what does this mean?
So I started reading it, and by the first sentence, I had no idea what it meant.
I read the whole page.
It didn't mean anything.
It was the most technical, confused.
I mean, I had no sense of any kind of what this might be about.
So I gave it back.
I said, I don't know what it is.
And the person said, I'll tell you what it is.
It's the law passed by the Congress of the United States that uses federal money to pave all the streets at Georgetown University.
It didn't even say that.
But it did.
That's why.
But that was the result.
That's why Father Healy came.
Because.
The notion was Gregorian had pulled all the private money out of New York that he could.
That there was no use going, there was the thought of going national, starting a national magazine and so forth.
But then it was clear that New York Public Library is finally not a national institution.
It's not L.C., it's not Harvard, it's not.
They've been doing things with Doubleday, for instance.
Have you noticed the books?
That was my idea.
Which I kind of like.
Is that right?
That was your idea?
Certainly was.
I think it's British.
I went to the lunch with a lunch then, actually.
Anyway, the notion was, Gregorian got all the drained.
Not drained.
So maybe he felt it was time to move on.
Oh, he chose to leave because the 80s were over.
He had done what he had
what he was going to do.
And he, I mean, he's not, he's very shrewd.
And so that was entirely voluntary because he did what he could do and was smart enough to say, it's time for me to go.
But healing, a Jesuit, running a public institution, it was a very strange or even bizarre choice.
But I just told you why.
Because the feeling was, we can't go national.
We've taken New York.
We've gotten all we're going to get here.
And so where?
Look around.
Who has money?
Federal government.
Was he successful?
I don't know.
He was not successful as a person.
He was just very bright, but reclusive.
Just the opposite of Gregorian.
Gregorian would aim head for the camera.
And he only would lock himself in his office.
So what do you think?
The thinking was then from Gregorian to Healy to Leclerc.
I mean... I was gone by that time, and so I don't want to say... But it seems to be a continuation... Leclerc seems to be closer to... It's more academic, because Healy claimed to be an academic.
But he's raising money.
He told me, he said, I have to raise $600,000 a week to keep this thing going.
Who says that?
Paul said this thing.
Leclerc.
Oh, sure.
Gregorian... That's the number.
That's the working number.
$600,000 a week.
Gregorian used to say, I go to lunch only for a million dollars.
That's a great quote.
It is.
And we called it lunch money.
Wow.
And my office was next.
Finally, I became manager of publications.
My office was next to the office of the person who physically handled the checks, entered them in the computer, and sent them to wherever they were supposed to go.
And Gregorian said, I don't have lunch for less than a million dollars.
That's amazing.
And every day Gregorian would go to lunch, and my friend next door would wait.
And about 2.30 or 3, somebody would come over from the president's office with the lunch one.
We called it lunch one.
And if it didn't, you know, it's 3 o'clock, there's no, I mean, you know, you get to depend on it.
He would call up and say,
VG didn't have lunch today.
You know, when I interviewed him in March last evening, of course, his new appointment had already been announced at the Carnegie Square.
He's very pleased to note that there have only been two foreign-born heads of the Carnegie Corporation, Andrew Carnegie himself.
And I said, you know, well, that's very interesting.
Andrew Carnegie built 1,600 libraries.
What are your plans for libraries?
He said, I have to go assess the situation.
He wouldn't say one way or the other if he plans to do anything.
He's very creative.
He's very powerful.
He did something that any sane person would say couldn't be done.
He took New York.
He took it.
He would do three parties a night.
Cocktails, dinner, and parties.
Three places, which he called, you know, dancing.
He would go.
And he would do three, you know, you do three a night, six days, that's 18 parties a week, and you meet a hell of a lot of people.
Look what he did at Brown, $300 million to $850 million at night.
He is an extraordinary, you know.
People, it got to be, he made the library fashionable.
And it got to be—I mean, people would be insulted if he didn't ask them for money.
People would come and say, you know, what's wrong with me?
My money isn't good enough for you.
And so, you know, he's the most extraordinary fundraiser I ever saw.
And he did it in a variety of ways.
First of all, he's—unlike people of the social class
who tend to have money.
Gregorian is very physical.
He was touching.
He'd come in, hug you, put his arm around you, touch you.
These are people who don't ever get touched by their own family.
And so that, there's a warmth about him, too.
And in New York, he passed for an intellectual.
passport are you suggesting no i didn't i'm just curious i didn't uh in the social circles in which he moved and remember this is new york which is very sophisticated but it's not boston or it's not even thought out there and gregory innocent there's no academics in that circle maybe arthur spessinger
Gregorian, you know, would be at a dinner party and he would say something about the Congress of Vienna.
Drop dead.
It was a knockout.
People thought, this guy, this guy is brilliant.
You'd say, you know, blah, blah, blah.
Then capitalism entered.
What I call the sophomore course is, you know, the World History Survey.
And among people in
the fashion industry.
This was the most brilliant small talk they had ever heard at parties.
He turned the hell out of me.
Well, I was talking about some of the things, like you asked me, what are you doing, and I was talking about the immigrant.
He said, well, when you're in Paris, you've got to go to the Polish library.
He said, when there was no Poland, they built this, they established this library in Paris, and that was the national... I didn't know that.
And I went there.
He is a charm.
And bang, we're talking about, you know, Soviets' book culture.
And he said, you know, when Beria fell out of power, fell out of favor, they sent out the word that you slice out Beria out of the encyclopedia and put in Bering Sea.
So I asked Edward Kasnack about this.
He says, absolutely.
And we kept the original.
I'll show it to you.
You see, with a computer, it was very interesting because today with a computer,
you'd just go in and take it out.
And there'd be no physical record of the change.
So it is irrelevant.
He's put in trash garbage.
Were you there?
You must have seen, of course, the New Yorker piece on the deaccessions and the Zinman.
That was after my point.
But that's all true.
All through the 80s, very rare material was just thrown out.
That's not Gregorian's doing it.
No, I don't think so.
I talked to David Stamm, who was up at Syracuse, and he said, I've got to tell you, that was me.
And this was at a breakfast with Bill Joyce just a couple weeks ago.
And they said, you know, we were doing 40,000 items a year.
It was funded by any age or whatever, and this was preservation money.
So they were actually preserving things by destroying them.
Like Vietnam.
So I don't know.
And did the library of Congress do that with its American literature or American history?
They certainly did it with all their newspapers.
I don't know if they did it with their history.
I think they did it with their American history or literature.
It happens to the people who get in there first, doesn't it, in some ways?
When I protested this in the eighties, I was told— You protested what?
I'm sorry.
Throwing the stuff away.
So you did— Oh, I was shocked.
First I was told that it wasn't happening, that everything was checked against the National Union catalog.
There were three or fewer non-copies that were saved.
Then I found out that was a lie.
So you saw this happening?
Oh, yes, wonderful pamphlets.
But nobody was telling you, David didn't know, for instance, I said, you know, the New Yorker didn't name the dealer.
And I thought it might have been Billy Reese who they were protecting, but it wasn't Bill Reese.
They said, you know, we don't, I can't remember.
I don't know who the dealer was.
Were they giving it to him?
Were they selling it?
I think what it comes down to is the guy was coming to get it at scrap value, and Zinman sold one pamphlet, I don't think it was in the New Yorker piece, for $56,000.
That's right.
This is because the people who were responsible for that, Paul Fasana, Richard DeGennaro, F-A-S-A-N-A, these are bureaucrats.
But they're bureaucrats and technicians, technocrats.
Well, were these people that came in, do you think, as part of that earlier group?
No, they were all—Fasano was a carryover.
He was there pre-Gregorian.
So he's a librarian?
He's a librarian.
But his field is technology.
He is the person— Is he still there?
No.
He is retired.
He is the person who put New York Public Library catalog on lawn.
He is the person I complained to, and he told me, as I said, it's not true.
Things are checked.
Then I found out that wasn't true.
They were throwing away stuff, which New York Valley had the only known copy.
It had been preserved, because they had filmed it.
And so I protested much more strongly on this to all of them.
The library is interested in—the library calls information, not options.
How do you define preservation?
I'm going to ask Ken to comment on it, too.
Well, that's not my field.
Let's ask Ken, how do you define preservation?
Well, as a matter of fact, you know, the object also has information, doesn't it?
Of course.
But the technocrat doesn't even know that.
No.
But, you know, there were pamphlets that I had seen
But at the time, I'd seen them say I didn't have a ruler with me.
Are we talking NYPL?
Yeah, an NYPL.
So my description was not complete for a bibliographical project.
So you had gone there as a scholar?
Yes.
I'd gone as a scholar because I was working on a bibliography of translations of economic literature.
And this is when you were at Crest?
Well, I've continued to work on it, actually.
And so I'd seen these pamphlets.
And then I went back in order to see them again and check my notes and measure them, and I couldn't do that.
So there was information that was gone.
Maybe I was looking to check the signature collation.
I don't know.
That could have been another reason I wanted to see it again.
Maybe I had some reason to doubt the accuracy of what I'd done.
But the information that that physical object contained was no longer accessible to me anyway.
And that's very significant information, you would say.
And this guy kind of goes back to this paratextual discussion we had.
Yeah, I mean, I think it's significant.
It's also true that the difference between information and the object is, in a way, it's hard to describe.
in the sense that one can say, yes, the library's job is to collect and preserve information.
And I can read a pamphlet on microfilm, and I, you know, same pamphlet, I get the same information.
But there is something emotionally different when you hold it in your hand, when it's an object.
See, that's what Stephen Jay Gould says.
It's true.
That's why he's in this particular chapter.
It's true, and particularly if this— He says he can't write from facsimiles, for instance.
It's the difference between reality and copies or imitations or pictures of, you know, but there's a thing and there's a picture of a thing.
You see, they would film the text of that.
You've just showed me a book called A Souvenir of the Anchor Line Agents.
Excursion on the steamer, California, August 14, 1870.
Gorgeous gold pictorial cloth.
This is, what would you say, the size is kind of a... Oversight.
Well, it certainly is quarto.
Well, I would say it's folio.
I would say it's kind of folio, too.
But this would disappear, is what you're telling me.
Yeah, that would be gone.
That would be gone.
All you would have would be a microfilm of that text.
We'd have a picture of it.
You would not know from that that this is truly a souvenir, you know, a grand book that they were giving away.
There's a difference between having a drink and having a picture of a drink.
Wow.
Is this something you rescued?
I ran across it in the stacks, and I'm going to turn it over to the Department of Printing and Graphic Arts in the Houghton Library, because I sometimes pull out interesting bindings for them as I go through things.
They'll want it.
You know, when I was at Cornell, you see,
embarked in a very modest program.
And when I was there in October of 96, they had already done 5,500 books.
Done.
Digitized.
And then I went up to the room where they do this, and I'll describe it.
Damn it, I had my camera with me.
I might go back just to take pictures.
Sixth floor overlooking this gorgeous lake.
And there are these books guillotined.
They look like real cutlets.
They look like they had been stripped and dressed.
They have been.
And they were there.
Slaughtered.
And then when they're done, and the quality control person, they're called digital archivists, by the way, the people who do this.
And then they go.
And I said, where do they go?
And Kenny says, there's a landfill.
and of course these are very early books with nice pictorial and they don't preserve the bindings they just they they don't and they will make paper copies from their digital stuff and i think that's kind of a concession by the way to the print people this is just my guess i don't even know that i'm sure that's a great it's a great fall and she showed me some she well this is their making of america series and so they had a bunch of harper's weeklies and monthlies
We punched up some stuff, and I said, you know, that's a Winslow Homer engraving.
What happened to that?
To the original?
Yeah, what happened?
I said, but do you know that there were no wood blocks preserved from Winslow?
You know, the engraving is as good as anybody has.
They don't care.
They don't understand.
They don't care, but you've got the picture here.
And you know, the day I walked into the, this was funny, the day I walked into the brand new Di Ducci Bibliotech in Frankfurt,
the computers were down.
So you had a bunch of people sitting there unable to do a goddamn thing.
Everything was down, you know.
I don't know, I don't know.
Very, very, very.
You came from publishing.
Can you just give me a little bit more about your background and what you're doing now, by the way, as much as you can... Through all this, my interest was in African-American culture and history.
Okay, this is great.
So I left the New York public to work at Columbia University on an encyclopedia of African-American culture and history for Macmillan, and then to Harvard to the...
W.E.B.
Du Bois Institute for Afro-American Research.
Do you know Charles Blockson?
Oh, very well.
Charles is one of my guys, one of the characters people in my book.
He is a character.
In my book.
And he is a great collector and a great person.
And I love him.
Charles and I vote that you can grow your club together.
Neither one of us would ever be invited.
I turned down the invitation because I said I already had a place to go to the bathroom in that section of New York.
It's good to me because I go to these things and the stories I'm directed to are quite marvelous.
It's a great group of people and knowledgeable.
These are the people who, these are book people.
At the dinner or two weeks I sat with Tom Tanzel for instance,
We don't have a chapter on bibliography, by the way, but I'm going to try and make this.
I've done a lot of work in African-American bibliography, because that's so essential.
You have to have bibliography before you can do anything else.
It's as simple as that.
I mean, you have to have a list.
Well, some people might say, when I was in Rome, I saw Father Boyle, who recently
has left his prefect at the... No, he's running this.
It was wonderful.
And I didn't even... I don't know why he left, and I don't care.
He's still one of the great bookmen of his generation.
You know what I mean?
They're getting rid of conservatives is what they were doing.
If you notice the list of cardinals... I mean, they're getting rid of liberals.
They're all dead.
They're getting ready for the next election.
And he was very conveniently moved aside the cover... There's no cover story, but I'm sure that Columbus...
You know, the manuscript had something to do with it.
Brilliant guy.
I don't know if you've ever met him.
I know who he is.
Wonderful guy.
But he is working on a project which began in 1886 on Aquinas.
They expect it's going to take another hundred years.
I'm sorry.
How can you justify?
I can't, but I mean, how do you explain to people why spending 200 years on Aquinas is necessary?
Well, I can explain it in the sense that
I've really spent my intellectual career working on African American culture and history, and so there's no area in American historical life that has been more neglected, unless maybe the neglect of scholarly interest in other minorities, women or immigrants or whatever.
But it's very clear that there is an African-American culture.
There is an African-American history, both of which used to be denied.
We now know that that's true.
And so the question is, how can you begin to think about that?
How can you begin to study that?
How can you begin to write about that?
And until you first find out what exists, who has written what, Phyllis Wheatley, how many poems did she write?
Where are they?
Well, you can't tell that just from that little slim volume.
No, no.
You can't tell what's in there, but there are as many poems published in other newspapers.
She wrote a second book.
It's lost.
How did you know that?
Because it was advertised in the Boston newspaper.
It was coming to be for sale.
So you have to track down everything.
Is this one of the things that you hope might turn up at some point?
Of course.
Yes, Henry Louis Gates hired somebody for the summer years ago to go to Philadelphia, spend the summer looking for it, because we think that's where it is.
And so you're hopeful that it's... Why Philly?
Because it was taken by her husband after her death, and we think he went to Philadelphia, and we think he, having no literary interest of his own, tried to sell it.
So, you know, the point is that here is the first African American to publish a book, and one, there is no biography of her, and two, there is no comprehensive bibliography of her.
So Thomas Aquinas, I mean, everybody who's serious enough to be a subject deserves, requires, it's necessary to have
To know what has been said, what has been thought, what has he written, what has been written about him.
I understand that.
But in my own field, I think it's even more dramatic because people have been reading Thomas Aquinas for centuries, but we've just discovered Phyllis Wheatley, as it was.
200 years after her death, we've just discovered her.
That's right.
She's still not a household name.
But my point is, before the biography can be written,
The bibliography has to be done.
What did she write and when and why?
Are you working on that?
I'm not, but other people are.
Here at the university?
It's being done.
So is there somebody who's coordinating all the episodes?
No, no, no.
It's more informal than that.
African American Studies doesn't yet have the money, doesn't yet have the power centers that can.
can do that kind of research.
But scholars are doing it, sometimes on their own time, nights and weekends, because right now that's what has to be done.
Everything's happening at once, but you have to go back at the same time you go forward if you're going to continue to go forward in an intelligent way.
That's great.
You were inspired.
Thanks.
How do I get in touch with you?
Do you have a phone number I can write down here?
Yeah, I have to look it up.
I've got it.
Oh, no, I have it right.
Because I might want to go over some of these quotes.
Oh, sure.
And I'm happy to do that, by the way.
Or more.
I mean, 354-617.
354-0366.
Is that right?
Yes, sir.
Thank you.
I do have to go.
This is terrific.
Somebody pays me for me.
Not much.
Thanks.
But I will tell you one James Lennox story.
As I say, we always said, Mr. Lennox said, Mr. Lennox, thanks, as if he were in the next room.
And you know that he was the son of James Lennox, who made a fortune in New York.
And then James Lennox, Jr.
was in
a melancholy Presbyterian who never married, who had no friends, but who increased the money that came to him and built a great, if not the greatest, American rare book collection.
A better one is the Brown.
Well, they were rivals.
Well, they had the same— They had the same interest.
Henry Stevens.
And Stevens always gave the first choice to—who's the person at Brown?
John Carter Brown.
I write about them in my book.
Anyway, the— You're over at the—where are you located?
Do you have an address?
Maybe I'll send you something.
Oh, do.
It's Du Bois Institute, 12 Quincy Street.
But Mr.— 0213A, right?
Mr. Lennox, Sr., had a reputation for being smart with money.
And so somebody, an acquaintance, came to him and said, I have, you know, I've saved up a little money, and I'd like to invest it, and I don't know what to do.
And, you know, I've heard that you're really good at this.
Would you take my money and invest it for me, Mr. Lennox?
The next senior said, sure, I'd be glad to.
So he took the money and invested it and bought a farm.
And the guy whose money it was thought, well, that's not very smart.
I mean, I could have bought a farm myself.
So he was the largest property owner in Manhattan.
I knew that.
He said, I don't think this is a very good investment.
And so he went to Mr. Lennox and said, you know, I don't get it.
I don't see this.
And I said, if it's possible, frankly, I'd like my money back.
And Mr. Lennox said, sure, sure, and gave him the money back.
thought still that it was a good investment, so he kept the farm for himself.
The farm is now known as from 68 to 73rd, from Park to 3rd.
It was way outside of the center.
And James Lennox, Jr.
sold it off in very small pieces.
Newbury bought land in Chicago by the acre and sold it by the running venture.
How did he make his money?
So I said, if you have a chance to buy a farm, do it.
I think that's it.
You're a great pleasure.
And you're doing something very exciting.
You're wonderful.
Ken knows exactly what I need.
I'll give you a call and say something.
And we'll go over some of this.
And I'm writing right now, which is really exciting.
Can you research and write at the same time?
Well, I've done 95% of the research.
What I have here is a truck of books.
that a computer scientist has written a program to tell me which are the books that are the best candidates to go out to story.
And if he gets the circulation records and a file that has circulation records and date and language, et cetera, et cetera, he can rank all of the books in
in order as to whether, you know, from the highest candidates for storage to the lowest candidates for storage.
And I suggested as a sample that he do economics from the YLC class.
Excellent.
Do you, by the way, mind if I take a picture of you with this?
Do you have any problems with that?
No, no, I don't either.
Good.
Okay, because I know we're in Wagner and I don't like... I think that's where...
Maybe I should put on my storage jacket here.
Okay, good.
Excellent.
I like just where it is out that door.
Or I can set off jackets.
I like to have a college library.
We can do both.
I'm going to take a lot of pictures today.
What I find is that
I can look at these very quickly and make a decision about whether the programming is right.
And this is one that caught my eye immediately because I figured, you know, ought not to go out to the repository.
Not to go out.
And that was what?
What was that?
Well, it happened to be a book on economics and it's called, in German, Economics and State in Germany during the Weimar Republic.
And, of course, you know, seeing that the Weimar Republic led to
Well, it just happened to be well.
How many books would you say are on that truck?
Can you call that a truck or a dolly?
We call it a book truck.
There are about 200 books on it, probably.
And how long did it take to put that together?
Well, actually, it took about two hours to pull the books that are on that truck.
The interesting thing is that if I go out into an area that's, you know, ripe for pulling of stuff, I can pull a truck in an hour to an hour and a half.
So I can actually do it faster than a student working from a list.
But, of course, I get paid more than the student.
And everything the student does, I gather that there will be a, somebody's going to look at this, somebody's going to pass on it before it signs off on it, I guess.
As long as I'm doing it, yeah.
I mean, if something a student does, is that the final say?
No, no, no, no, no, no.
Will there be a supervisor of sorts there?
Well, I mean, I am, you know, looking at the books before they go out, although I'm not looking in a way... Now, why is that?
Does that basically say that's staying or that's going?
No, that's staying.
So when you put it down on its spine like that,
You see, not so fast at this point.
Yeah, exactly.
But I don't, you know, but most of them.
You know, the last truck I looked at, I think there were only seven books that I felt really needed to stay here.
So they've done a pretty good job.
So the computer program is working, you know?
Yeah, that's it.
And since, you know, I only spent about ten minutes or so on the...
on the truck.
That's not bad.
You mentioned this Knowledge Wins poster in my last interview, and I wasn't sure.
Yeah, I put that in bookshop.
You went to Bowdoin, by the way.
Yeah.
I went to Bates, so there's a... Yeah, yeah.
I was going through your Vita the other day.
Yeah, yeah.
Most of these
We'll take a look at it and see.
No one's ever... Well, there is one.
But you can even feel, you know, by the... It's never been read.
Hear the noise.
That's a book that's never been read.
But I try not to emphasize that there are books around here that haven't been read because, you know... We dealt with that when we spoke last time.
And when you see this, I get into that.
Yeah.
No, I think what you said is institutional histories, amateur histories, philatelic material that you had hundreds of copies of, defense department training manuals.
These are easy.
These are very easy.
But you said contemporary fiction and poetry, too, which I found interesting.
So there isn't that much call for contemporary fiction?
Well, in English there is.
No.
In English there is.
Now what's this here you're holding?
Well, it's a... This happens to be a press script as well.
And on...
economic development in the Mediterranean and on the continent of Europe.
And in a way, and Hermann, you know, it's a question for Hermann Cullenbest, a great German economic historian, but it's been here now for
It came in in 79, so it's been here for 20 years.
Well, it has been borrowed once, and in a way I hate to send it out, but I think that at this point it's not going to be used because someone stumbles across an article there because the content was so diverse.
But rather that it's going to be used because... So what's the book we're talking about, Ken?
This might be a little C, you know, I mean... There's a chance I could get a copy of the title.
Sure.
Let me go.
This would make a very interesting... You say this is a very difficult choice.
Yeah.
We're talking about the worst... How do you say that?
Would you pronounce it?
Wirtschaftskräfte und Wirtschaftswege.
And translates, how would that translate?
Well, let me... I'm here to talk today, I'm sorry.
I'm not, you know, those are funny kinds of... An approximation, just... I wouldn't put it direct, but just... Economic strength and development.
Okay, good, cool.
That's fine.
But that's a difficult choice.
That's why it's a bit necessary for me to know why it's a difficult choice.
And it's a difficult choice, and I can, you know, find good translations.
I find it a difficult choice because it's a real scholarly, you know, it's a hard-core scholarly book, and covering all kinds of topics that historians, medievalists, are going to be interested in here.
the interest and interest fluctuation in Basel, 1360 to 1535, and the history of the Levant pepper trade around 1500.
And this is a Widener book, not a Crest book, right?
It's a Widener book, and there are five volumes of this.
of this pressure.
You have five copies of this?
No, it's a five-volume book.
It's a five-volume work.
Okay.
Because Kellen Benz is a major... No, I cannot...